Haskell Foundation Community Grants (#14)
haskellfoundation/tech-proposals: proposals/000-comm-grants.md

# Community Grants

## Introduction

This proposal is for the Haskell Foundation to undertake a direct small grant
program, funded by individual donations to the foundation, to distribute funding
where it can make a difference to the Haskell community.  The aim is to make the
Haskell Foundation a more appealing target for individuals wishing to donate for
the good of the entire Haskell community.  This indefinite ongoing program would
accept submissions from the community on a rolling basis, and award up to $2000
grants to individuals as a stipend to support their work on the proposed
project.

The amount of money involved is small, so the primary risk of the proposal is
that funding decisions would generate discouragement or ill will from rejected
submissions.  The risk can be partially mitigated by the use of a random lottery
system to select winners after an initial selection of submissions that the

> Foundation believes are worth accepting.

Reviewer: I like this idea! A random function seems to me a good way to avoid any negative sentiment. However, I would like to point out something that is possibly a nitpick surrounding how we talk about these sums of money. 

Throughout the conversation on discourse, as well as above, we refer to this amount of money as "small". This points to a slight disconnect in the way we're all framing this: $2000 is *alot* of money depending on whom you ask! If I were a grad student or an junior professional, I'd be chomping at the bit to engage this process and score a month or two's worth of rent for open source work, and I certainly would not expect this to be recurring - it's alot of money after all! I don't think there's much utility in framing this in terms of the size of the grant contributing to the risk factor. I think it might just be inherent to any conversation involving competition for sums of money.

## Background

Numerous mechanisms currently exist for individuals to financially support parts
of the Haskell community, including projects that have individually set up
fundraising, individuals who have requested donations via Patreon, GitHub
sponsorships, etc., and purchase of services and subscriptions to content.  Each
of these choices supports a specific part of the Haskell community, and none of
them offer a default way to contribute to Haskell as a whole.

The Haskell Foundation now also accepts individual donations, and its
organizational mission is consistent with being precisely such an appealing
target for general-purpose donations to Haskell.  However, there is currently
not a clear picture for how funds make it from donations to the Haskell
Foundation to directly encouraging contributions to the Haskell community.  In

> surveys of the community, individuals who have decided not to contribute to the

Reviewer 2: When I searched for the best way in which my employer's charity money could benefit the Haskell community, I ended up with two top contenders: giving money to the Haskell Foundation, and splitting the money among many of the open-source projects and contributors who ask for contributions. So at least in my case, knowing that the Haskell Foundation would in turn distribute some of the money to some of those open-source projects would definitely have helped steer the decision towards giving to the Haskell Foundation.

> surveys of the community, individuals who have decided not to contribute to the

Reviewer 3: Yes!  To me, a key role of the programme is to provide a single, trustworthy donation point, that donors can trust to exercise good judgement about how to spend it in the interests of the community.  When I give money to Unicef or the World Wildlife Fund that is exactly what I'm doing: I trust them to spend it wisely.  If I had to decide which project in which country to donate to I'd be so overwhelmed I'd give nothing.

The HFTP process superficially appears to offer such a path.  However, there are
several barriers to its being used directly by individuals or small projects for
which funding could make a difference.  Note that "individuals and small
projects" describes a vast portion of crucial Haskell libraries and tools.

1. The HFTP process is not encouraging to individuals looking for small amounts
   of funding, and says things like "Typically, this includes many rounds of
   discussion with HF leaders, Haskell library maintainers, and the broader
   community, several iterations on the design of the proposal, and some effort
   at prototyping the proposed change."
2. The benefit of small grants can depend on life circumstances, such as one's
   need for child care, willingness to leave an employer, etc.  Individuals may
   prefer not to include this information in a document open for public comment.

Thus, the HFTP process isn't a great fit for direct requests from individuals or
small projects for financial support.  Furthermore, the HFTP process gives an
explicit example of a "Summer of Code" style program as within scope for an HFTP
proposal.  This is such a proposal.

> Several other communities have similar grant programs.  Some examples include:

Reviewer 4: I would love to know more about how these programs work in other communities -- especially the open source ones. (While I do know the internals about the Tweag Fellowship program, I think that program is sufficiently different from what's being proposed here so as to make our data irrelevant.) What are those programs' goals? Have the programs achieved the goals? What's the role of these programs within their communities?

* Google Summer of Code, which awards between $1500 and $3300 per student,
  scaled by cost of living, for a student to contribute to a project for a
  summer.
* Clojurists Together, which awards between $1500 and $9000 per grant for people
  to contribute to a Clojure project for an indefinite period of time.
* The Unitary Fund, which awards $4000 per grant for research-based
  contributions to quantum technology.
* The Tweag Open Source Fellowship, which states that it's twice the amount of

>   Google Summer of Code.

Reviewer: Glad we mentioned this. There's prior art in Haskell to lean on :+1:

of the foundation itself.

There are several secondary motivations, as well.

* We hope to increase open source contributions to Haskell by finding high
  efficiency investments where a small contribution can make a big difference
  because someone is in a place where they are blocked from contributing.  This
  doesn't necessarily have to be a top priority for the community.  If a small
  investment can help even a second-tier priority, it is still a good thing.
* We hope to build more community support and awareness of people contributing
  to Haskell.  Bringing the community together in support of a shared goal can
  clear the path of procedural obstacles.

## Goals

The goal of this proposal is to set up a small grant program administered by the
Haskell Foundation.

Submissions to the grant program should come from individuals who feel they
could perform additional work on projects of benefit to the Haskell community if
they had extra funding.  Submissions may include:

* Open source tools and libraries.  This should focus on tools that are broadly
  useful for Haskell developers.  Simply being written in Haskell is not enough.

> * Documentation and learning materialsthat are freely available to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Documentation and learning materials that are freely available to the
```

  community.
* Project leadership and support, including user support, project management,
  bug triage and coordination, code review, and technical writing.

Certain submissions are not appropriate, and those submitting them would be
referred to the HFTP process, instead.  This includes anything asking for
financial support above $2000.  (This is less than other similar programs, but
we feel it's important to limit the risk given the lower standard of review
involved.)  It also includes any submission that might be controversial in any
way, because the more private nature of these proposals isn't the right process
for anything potentially controversial.  Submissions should also not ask for
assistance from the Haskell Foundation beyond the grant money, so if someone
wants to recruit contributors, find infrastructure, etc. that they don't intend
to pay for themselves, this is not the right process for that.  (However, a
submission that explains that someone has already lined up extra assistance is
welcome.)  Grants must be awarded to a single individual, and not shared among
multiple contributors.  More complex proposals like this are also better suited

> the the HFTP process.

Reviewer: Some concrete examples may be good to illustrate the difference. @phadej brings up a good point: the Text UTF8 work would have been a prime candidate for this. However, broader organizational efforts like the errors work raised in #12 would be more HFTP flavored precisely because it involves a long stretch of time, and requires both managing the project and sourcing volunteers.

These individuals would write a short summary of their intended work, limited to
two pages, and answering the following questions:

* What are you intending to do, and how will it benefit the Haskell community?
* Why are you the right person to do this work?  If possible, submissions are
  strongly encouraged to include a statement of support from an existing
  maintainer of or core contributor to the project involved.
* How much funding are you asking for, and how will it make your work possible?

As a prerequisite for receiving a grant, individuals will agree to write two

> blog posts and share a link to discourse.haskell.org.  The first is a project

Reviewer: Do we want these to be individual blog posts on some personal site, or on the Medium instance (https://haskell-foundation.medium.com/)? I'm inclined to say "let them choose the venue".

is drawn which cannot be funded with the remaining budget.  The committee will
then recommend to the executive team to award the grants selected in the
lottery.  The executive team will have final authority to award grants.

## People

- The Haskell Foundation executive team and board will determine how many
  projects are chosen by setting a budget as funds are available.
- There will be a Community Grant Committee of five people responsible for
  evaluating whether to accept each submission.  This will be chosen by the
  Haskell Foundation executive team.
- Proposals will be written and submitted by various members of the community
  who feel their contributions would benefit from funding.

## Resources

The project can consume whatever resources are allocated to it, at the
discretion of the Haskell Foundation board or executive team.

## Timeline

- Choosing a Community Grant Committee may require apprroximately a month.
- Once there is a Community Grant Committee, the first round of grants can occur
  as soon as the budget is available.  The committee will choose new grants
  monthly after that.

## Lifecycle:

> N/A

Reviewer 4: I think there is a bit that could be said here: it would take some time (a month?) to actually organize, and then the grants program could begin, without a specified ending date.

## Deliverables

> N/A

Reviewer 4: I would say this proposal does have deliverables:
 - The membership (and written charter) of the Community Grant Committee.
 - Advertisements on our website and elsewhere that this program exists.
 - A functioning mechanism for submitting applications.

and perhaps others.

> ## Outcomes

Reviewer 4: Though I'm not sure how it fits in this template: how would we assess the success of this program? Every proposal (in my personal opinion) should have criteria that define its success. It may be sometimes that the effort of measuring the criteria (e.g. extensive surveying) might be too high to be worth it, but we should still be able to define what success looks like.

What do you think are the success criteria? Should there be a plan for assessing the program (after, say, a year) to see if it's meeting these criteria?

* We expect an increase in individual donations to the Haskell Foundation.
* We expect an increase in project work by people receiving grants.
* We anticipate the possibility of some negative sentiment as some grants are
  not awarded.  We seek to minimize this by choosing winners in a random
  lottery, so that failure to receive an award isn't seen as rejection by the
  community.

## Risks

> The main risk worth considering is that funding decisions will generate

Reviewer 4: How will we know whether this is happening? That is, if we successfully fund 10 projects/year, but also put off 20 other projects through disappointment, how will we know?
